[Music]
you know when it comes to finding
diamonds in the ocean
you probably think about sunken
treasures that went down with pirate
ships and Spanish galleons maybe you'd
like to find the floor Delamar which
sank in 1511 and took with it 200 chests
of treasure including diamonds the size
of your fist if you're set on looking
for underwater fortunes there's just two
problems first finding sunken treasure
is no easy feat people have been looking
for the Florida Lamarr for over 500
years
second Finders Keepers losers weepers it
doesn't apply here you may have to give
the diamonds back I don't mean drop them
back into the ocean to avoid Davy Jones
curse
I mean return them to the country of
origin international law is tricky
the only people sure to get rich are the
lawyers and that's why mom wants you to
go to law school but there are lots of
diamonds at the bottom of the sea that
didn't go down with a ship how did they
get there
well natural diamonds not the ones we
make but more on those later come from
the Earth's mantle 100 miles or more
beneath our planet's surface if you
could hop in your car and drive that
distance it would take you two hours at
highway speeds that's a long way a much
longer trip than say going to the
deepest anyone has ever drilled into the
Earth's crust that would be less than
eight miles not even a tenth of the way
to the Diamonds so if they form so deep
how do any end up here with us on the
surface if you guessed boom volcanoes
nice job you get brownie points when
volcanoes erupt it's a lot like when you
burn seriously imagine you're standing
in a hole with just your head sticking
out your head is the visible mountainous
part of a volcano your buried body is
all the stuff bubbling underground when
you burp hot gases from deep in the
earth or your stomach rise up with a
volcano if the lava spews up from a deep
enough layer like 100 miles down then
diamonds shoot out
okay but what about the diamonds in the
ocean are there volcanoes underwater why
yes yes there are volcanoes erupt when
the tectonic plates beneath them move
around this releases all kinds of hot
stuff underneath those lava burps when
the same thing happens underwater is
called a subduction zone that's a term
you won't hear much outside of geology
if it reminds you of the word submarine
well there's a good reason for that
you see sub means under and marine means
water that's why some people call the
seafloor type of diamonds the marine
kind a subduction zone is a place where
huge tectonic plates shift around
underwater when one plate slides under
another it's kind of like sticking a
shovel into the mud and lifting up the
dirt worms pop out they do that because
you disturb them disturb a sleeping dog
it wakes up and moves to serve sleeping
diamonds and they move to some diamonds
will sink deeper into the earth just
like some of those worms might but other
diamonds will move up especially if the
tectonic plate releases hot gas and lava
the reason because heat rises and
carries the Diamonds up with it
but how do Diamond hunters find
subduction zones all the way at the
bottom of the ocean good question
because it's not easy even for
scientists so some people save
themselves the trouble and make their
own diamonds you can make a diamond from
anything with carbon in it yep even Bert
toast
just got to add heat and pressure but
you can't do it at home because well
your toaster isn't hot enough your
pressure cooker won't work either in a
lab they make diamonds using something
called HP HT that stands for high
pressure high temperature and high is an
understatement the pressure they use is
seven hundred twenty-five thousand
pounds per square inch
whoa it'd be like having a mountain drop
on your foot Oh as for the temperature
does 2,000 degrees sound high enough to
warrant that h & HT
yeah that's as hot as lava which makes
sense diamonds come from volcanoes right
well nowhere near as pretty as natural
diamonds these human-made or industrial
diamonds have plenty of uses if you've
seen fake diamonds they might be made of
glass that glass was probably cut with
an industrial diamond whether it's
artificial or all-natural Diamond is one
of the hardest substances on earth it
can cut just about anything from the
drills that your dentist uses on your
teeth to the saws that cut through trees
and metal all sorts of blades are made
with industrial diamonds diamonds are
also great conductors of heat and they
can withstand high temperatures think
about it you can't put anything on the
stove a piece of wood will catch fire
plastic will melt if you've cooked eggs
in a pan you can be sure that pan was
made of metal because metal conducts
heat that means it absorbs heat into
itself and spreads it around nice and
even so that your eggs cook just right
but diamonds do this even better that's
why you can find them inside electrical
equipment and yep the coating on
cookware some facial exfoliator --zz
even have ground-up diamonds in them the
crush gems look like sandpaper to scrape
off rough skin and reveal a fresh new
complexion okay let's reel it in here
the seafloor is teeming with diamonds
next question is it possible to get them
and if so how can I do it oh yeah it's
possible all right people are harvesting
diamonds from under the sea right now as
you watch this video but most of them
don't come from deep tectonic subduction
zones they come from rivers you see
rivers run through all kinds of terrain
and they carry a little of whatever they
wash over with them as they flow along
this hitchhiking passenger is called
sediment it's the stuff at the bottom of
a river sediment is mostly made up of
shells grit and silt the usual things
you'll find under water the river's
current carries sediment downstream
and if the river washes through a
diamond mind
well the sediment will have diamonds the
river washes those diamonds downstream
until at last it dumps them into the sea
these diamonds are easier to find than
pirate treasure or a subduction zone
just look for sparkles where the river
mouth empties into the ocean now how did
they figure this out
the first clue probably came from the
Orange River in South Africa this body
of water meanders through all kinds of
rocky and has been famous for diamonds
since the 1800s that's when people
started fighting Dazzlers like the
Eureka diamond originally weighing over
21 carats on its banks
the Eureka wasn't the only one people
kept finding more and they still do
today treasure hunters have been digging
up the banks of the Orange River for 200
years which is why diamonds are getting
harder to find you might imagine scuba
divers with flashlights toil fully
hunting for prismatic gleams Oh
somebody's been using their thesaurus
now that might work for a diver who only
wanted one diamond and maybe a shell but
companies like the beers a big shot in
the diamond industry have found a more
efficient method think of it this way
if you spilled some sand on your shag
carpet and you wanted to get it up you
wouldn't use a broom the bristles would
only drive the Greens deeper into the
carpets fibers if you tried to sweep up
diamonds you just push them under the
ocean floor you could crawl around your
carpet with a flashlight and a pair of
tweezers like our scuba diver carefully
extracting each grain one at a time that
would work and you would eventually
collect a few grains but you'd miss your
soccer game and dinner and probably
bedtime and maybe next year it would
take forever and you'd miss a lot of
that precious sand but you wouldn't do
that you would simply vacuum the carpet
and have that stuff up in no time and
that's what the people that De Beers are
doing they figure out where the river
spills its and make that diamonds on the
ocean floor
then they send out ships that looks
something like oil tankers but instead
of carrying oil these vessels have giant
vacuums that reach through the water and
suck up the sparklers of course they
suck up a lot of other stuff too but
they don't mind sifting through it I
mean if you swept up diamonds instead of
sand you'd happily open up your vacuum
cleaner bag and sort through the dirt
and dog hair to find them it might be
yucky but it'd be worth it in fact maybe
you should go vacuum the living room
right now you know for practice after
all there are a lot more diamonds at the
bottom of the ocean just waiting to be
claimed ah I can hear the new Beatles
song right now
Lucy in the muck with diamonds yeah hey
if you learned something new today then
give the video a like and share it with
a friend and here are some other cool
videos I think you'll enjoy just click
to the left or right and remember stay
on the bright side of life
[Music]